---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Nullness User Guide (draft)

In Java code, whether an expression may evaluate to null is often documented
only in natural language, if at all. The goal of JSpecify is to permit
programmers to express specifications (initially, just nullness properties) in a
machine-readable way.

JSpecify defines annotations that describe whether a Java type contains the
value null. Such annotations are useful to (for example):

*   programmers reading the code,
*   tools that help developers avoid NullPointerExceptions,
*   tools that perform run-time checking and test generation, and
*   documentation systems.

## Java variables are references

In Java, all non-primitive variables are references. We often think of `String
x` as meaning "`x` is a `String`", but actually it means "`x` is a *reference*,
either null or a reference to a string object".

JSpecify includes a `@NullMarked` annotation. In code covered by that
annotation, `String x` means "`x` is a reference to a string object", and
`@Nullable String x` means "`x` is either null or a reference to a string
object"

## Types and nullness

Each reference can have one of three possible properties regarding nullness:

1.  JSpecify annotations indicate that it can be null.
2.  JSpecify annotations indicate that it can't be null.
3.  JSpecify annotations don't indicate whether it can be null.

For a given reference `x`, if `x` can be null then `x.getClass()` is unsafe
because it could produce a NullPointerException. If `x` can't be null,
`x.getClass()` can never produce a NullPointerException. If JSpecify annotations
haven't said whether `x` can be null or not, we don't know whether
`x.getClass()` is safe (at least as far as JSpecify is concerned).

There are two JSpecify annotations that indicate these properties:

*   `@Nullable` applied to a type means a reference of that type can be null.

*   `@NullMarked` applied to a module, package, or class means that a reference
    in that scope can't be null unless its type is explicitly marked
    `@Nullable`. (Below we will see that there are some exceptions to this for
    [local variables](#local-variables) and
    [type variables](#defining-generics).)

The notion of "can't be null" should really be read with a footnote that says
"if all the code in question is `@NullMarked`". For example, if you have some
code that is not `@NullMarked` and that calls a `@NullMarked` method, then tools
might allow it to pass a possibly-null value to a method that is expecting a
"can't be null" parameter.

## `@Nullable`

The `@Nullable` annotation applied to a type means that that use of the type
includes references that can be null. Code that deals with those references must
be able to deal with the null case.

```java
static void print(@Nullable String x) {
  System.out.println(String.valueOf(x));
}
```

In this example, the parameter `x` can be null, so `print(null)` is a valid
method call. The body of the `print` method does not do anything with `x` that
would provoke a NullPointerException so this method is safe.

```java
static @Nullable String emptyToNull(@Nullable String x) {
  return (x == null || x.isEmpty()) ? null : x;
}
```

In this example, the parameter `x` can still be null, but now the return value
can be too. You might use this method like this:

```java
void doSomething(@Nullable String x) {
  print(emptyToNull(x));
  // OK: print accepts a @Nullable String

  String z = emptyToNull(x).toString();
  // Not OK: emptyToNull(x) can be null
}
```

Tools could then use the `@Nullable` information to determine that the first use
is safe but the second is not.

As far as JSpecify is concerned, `String` and `@Nullable String` are *different*
types. A variable of type `String` can reference any string object. A variable
of type `@Nullable String` can too, but it can also be null. This means that
`String` is a *subtype* of `@Nullable String`, in the same way that `Integer` is
a subtype of `Number`. One way to look at this is that a subtype narrows the
range of possibilities. A `Number` variable can be assigned from an `Integer`
but it can also be assigned from a `Long`. Meanwhile an `Integer` variable can't
be assigned from a `Number` (since that `Number` might be a `Long` or some other
subtype). Likewise, a `@Nullable String` can be assigned from a `String` but a
`String` can't be assigned from a `@Nullable String` (since that might be null).

```java
@NullMarked
class Example {
  void useNullable(@Nullable String x) {...}
  void useNonNull(String x) {...}
  void example(@Nullable String nullable, String nonNull) {
    useNullable(nonNull); // JSpecify allows this
    useNonNull(nullable); // JSpecify doesn't allow this
  }
}
```

## `@NullMarked`

The `@NullMarked` annotation indicates that references can't be null in its
scope, unless their types are explicitly marked `@Nullable`. If applied to a
module then its scope is all the code in the module. If applied to a package
then its scope is all the code in the package. (Note that packages are _not_
hierarchical; applying `@NullMarked` to package `com.foo` does not make package
`com.foo.bar` `@NullMarked`.)  If applied to a class or interface then its scope
is all the code in that class or interface.

Outside `@NullMarked`, `@Nullable String` still means a reference that can be
null, but JSpecify doesn't have anything to say about whether plain `String` can
be null.

```java
@NullMarked
public class Strings {
  public static String nullToEmpty(@Nullable String x) {
    return (x == null) ? "" : x;
  }

  public static int spaceIndex(String x) {
    return x.indexOf(' ');
  }
}
```

In this example, both methods are in the scope of `@NullMarked`, so plain
`String` means "a reference to a string object, not null". `@Nullable String`
continues to mean "a reference to a string object, or null". Tools should warn
you if you try to pass a "reference to a string object, or null" to
`spaceIndex`, since its argument can't be null, and indeed it will throw
NullPointerException if given a null argument.

As mentioned above, there are some exceptions to this interpretation for local
variables (as we'll see next) and [type variables](#defining-generics).

## Local variables {#local-variables}

Tools that understand JSpecify annotations typically *don't* require `@Nullable`
to be applied to local variables. They may in fact not even allow that. The
reason is that it should be possible to *infer* whether a variable can be null
based on the values that are assigned to the variable. For example:

```java
@NullMarked
class MyClass {
  void myMethod(@Nullable String one, String two) {
    String anotherOne = one;
    String anotherTwo = two;
    String oneOrTwo = random() ? one : two;
    String twoOrNull = Strings.emptyToNull(two);
    ...
  }
}
```

Analysis can tell that all of these variables except `anotherTwo` can be null.
`anotherTwo` can't be null since `two` can't be null: it is not `@Nullable` and
it is inside the scope of `@NullMarked`. `anotherOne` can be null since it is
assigned from a `@Nullable` parameter. `oneOrTwo` can be null because it may
assigned from a `@Nullable` parameter. And `twoOrNull` can be null because its
value comes from a method that returns `@Nullable String`.

## Generics

When you are referencing a generic type, the rules about `@Nullable` and
`@NullMarked` are as you would expect from what we have seen. For example,
`List<@Nullable String>` means a list where each element is either a reference
to a string object or it is null. In a `@NullMarked` context, `List<String>`
means a list where each element is a reference to a string object and *can't* be
null.

### Defining generic types {#defining-generics}

Things are a bit more complicated when you are *defining* a generic type.
Consider this:

```java
@NullMarked
public class NumberList<E extends Number> implements List<E> {...}
```

The `extends Number` defines a *bound* for the type variable `E`. It means that
you can write `NumberList<Integer>`, since `Integer` can be assigned to
`Number`, but you can't write `NumberList<String>`, since `String` can't be
assigned to `Number`. This is standard Java behavior.

But now let's think about that bound as it relates to `@NullMarked`. Can we
write `NumberList<@Nullable Integer>`? The answer is no, because we have `<E
extends Number>` inside `@NullMarked`. Since it is `Number` and not `@Nullable
Number`, that means it can't be null. `@Nullable Integer` can't be assigned to
it, since that *can* be null. Inside `@NullMarked`, you must explicitly provide
a `@Nullable` bound on your type variable if you want it to be able to represent
a `@Nullable` type:

```java
@NullMarked
public class NumberList<E extends @Nullable Number> implements List<E> {...}
```

Now it *is* legal to write `NumberList<@Nullable Integer`>, since `@Nullable
Integer` is assignable to the bound `@Nullable Number`. It's *also* legal to
write `NumberList<Integer>`, since plain `Integer` is assignable to `@Nullable
Number`. Inside `@NullMarked`, plain `Integer` means a reference to an actual
`Integer` value, never null. That just means that the `@Nullable Number` can
technically be null but in this case it never will be.

Of course this assumes that `List` itself is written in a way that allows null:

```java
@NullMarked
public interface List<E extends @Nullable Object> {...}
```

If it were `interface List<E>` rather than `interface List<E extends @Nullable
Object>` then `NumberList<E extends @Nullable Number> implements List<E>` would not
be legal. That's because `interface List<E>` is short for `interface List<E
extends Object>`. Inside `@NullMarked`, plain `Object` means "`Object` reference
that can't be null". The `<E extends @Nullable Number>` from NumberList would
not be compatible with `<E extends Object>`.

The implication of all this is that every time you define a type variable like
`E` you need to decide whether it can represent a `@Nullable` type. If it can,
then it must have a `@Nullable` bound. Most often this will be `<E extends
@Nullable Object>`. On the other hand, if it *can't* represent a `@Nullable`
type, that is expressed by not having `@Nullable` in its bound (including the
case of not having an explicit bound at all). Here's another example:

```java
@NullMarked
public class ImmutableList<E> implements List<E> {...}
```

Here, because it is `ImmutableList<E>` and not `ImmutableList<E extends
@Nullable Object>`, it is not legal to write `ImmutableList<@Nullable String>`.
You can only write `ImmutableList<String>`, which is a list of non-null `String`
references.

### Using type variables in generic types

Let's look at what the methods in the `List` interface might look like:

```java
@NullMarked
public interface List<E extends @Nullable Object> {
  boolean add(E element);
  E get(int index);
  @Nullable E getFirst();
  ...
}
```

The parameter type `E` of `add` means a reference that is compatible with the
actual type of the `List` elements. Just as you can't add an `Integer` to a
`List<String>`, you also can't add a `@Nullable String` to a `List<String>`, but
you *can* add it to a `List<@Nullable String>`.

Similarly, the return type `E` of `get` means that it returns a reference with
the actual type of the list elements. If the list is a `List<@Nullable String>`
then that reference is a `@Nullable String`. If the list is a `List<String>`
then the reference is a `String`.

On the other hand, the return type `@Nullable E` of the (fictitious) `getFirst`
method is always `@Nullable`. It will be `@Nullable String` whether called on a
`List<@Nullable String>` or a `List<String>`. The idea is that the method
returns the first element of the list, or null if the list is empty. Similarly,
the real methods `@Nullable V get(Object key)` in `Map` and `@Nullable E peek()`
in `Queue` can return null even when `V` and `E` can't be null.

The distinction here is an important one that is worth repeating. A use of a
type variable like `E` should only be `@Nullable E` if it means a reference that
can be null *even if* `E` itself can't be null. Otherwise, plain `E` means a
reference that can only be null if `E` is a `@Nullable` type, like `@Nullable
String` in this example. (And, as we've seen, `E` can only be a `@Nullable` type
if the definition of `E` has a `@Nullable` bound like `<E extends @Nullable
Object>`.)

We saw earlier that `@NullMarked` usually means "references can't be null unless
they are marked `@Nullable`", and also that that doesn't apply to local
variables. Here we see that it doesn't apply to type variable uses either. When
not marked `@Nullable`, they can still be null if they have a `@Nullable` bound.

### Using type variables in generic methods

Essentially the same considerations that we just saw with generic types apply to
generic methods too. Here's an example:

```java
@NullMarked
public class Methods {
  public static <T> @Nullable T
      firstOrNull(List<T> list) {
    return list.isEmpty() ? null : list.get(0);
  }

  public static <T> T
      firstOrNonNullDefault(List<T> list, T defaultValue) {
    return list.isEmpty() ? defaultValue : list.get(0);
  }

  public static <T extends @Nullable Object> T
      firstOrDefault(List<T> list, T defaultValue) {
    return list.isEmpty() ? defaultValue : list.get(0);
  }

  public static <T extends @Nullable Object> @Nullable T
      firstOrNullableDefault(List<T> list, @Nullable T defaultValue) {
    return list.isEmpty() ? defaultValue : list.get(0);
  }
}
```

The `firstOrNull` method will accept a `List<String>` but not a `List<@Nullable
String>`. When given an argument of type `List<String>`, `T` is `String`, so the
return type `@Nullable T` is `@Nullable String`. The input list can't contain
null elements, but the return value can be null.

The `firstOrNonNullDefault` method again does not allow `T` to be a `@Nullable`
type, so `List<@Nullable String>` is not allowed. Now the return value is not
`@Nullable` either which means it will never be null.

The `firstOrDefault` method will accept both `List<String>` and `List<@Nullable
String>`. In the first case, `T` is `String`, so the type of the `defaultValue`
parameter and of the return value is `String`, meaning neither can be null. In
the second case, `T` is `@Nullable String`, so the type of `defaultValue` and of
the return value is `@Nullable String`, meaning both can be null.

The `firstOrNullableDefault` method again accepts both `List<String>` and
`List<@Nullable String>`, but now the `defaultValue` parameter is marked
`@Nullable` so it can be null even in the `List<String>` case. Likewise the
return value is `@Nullable T` so it can be null even when `T` can't.

Here's another example:

```java
public static <T> List<@Nullable T> nullOutMatches(List<T> list, T toRemove) {
  List<@Nullable T> copy = new ArrayList<>(list);
  for (int i = 0; i < copy.size(); i++) {
    if (copy.get(i).equals(toRemove)) {
      copy.set(i, null);
    }
  }
  return copy;
}
```

This takes a `List<T>`, which by definition does not contain null elements, and
produces a `List<@Nullable T>`, with null in place of every element that matched
`toRemove`. The output is a `List<@Nullable T>` because it *can* contain null
elements, even if `T` itself can't be null.

## Some subtler details

The previous sections cover 99% of everything you need to know to be able to use
JSpecify annotations effectively. Here we'll cover a few details you probably
won't need to know.

### Type-use annotation syntax

There are a couple of places where the syntax of type-use annotations like
`@Nullable` may be surprising.

1.  For a nested static type like `Map.Entry`, if you want to say that the value
    can be null then the syntax is `Map.@Nullable Entry`. You can often avoid
    dealing with this by importing the nested type directly, but in this case
    `import java.util.Map.Entry` might be undesirable because `Entry` is such a
    common type name.

1.  For an array type, if you want to say that the *elements* of the array can
    be null then the syntax is `@Nullable String[]`. If you want to say that the
    *array itself* can be null then the syntax is `String @Nullable []`. And if
    both the elements and the array itself can be null, the syntax is `@Nullable
    String @Nullable []`.

A good way to remember this is that it is the thing right after `@Nullable` that
can be null. It is the `Entry` that can be null in `Map.@Nullable Entry`, not
the `Map`. It is the `String` that can be null in `@Nullable String[]` and it is
the `[]`, meaning the array, that can be null in `String @Nullable []`.

### Wildcard bounds

Inside `@NullMarked`, wildcard bounds work almost exactly the same as type
variable bounds. We saw that `<E extends @Nullable Number>` means that E can be
a `@Nullable` type and `<E extends Number>` means it can't. Likewise, `List<?
extends @Nullable Number>` means a list where the elements can be null, and
`List<? extends Number>` means they can't.

However, there's a difference when there is no explicit bound. We saw that a
type variable definition like `<E>` means `<E extends Object>` and that means it
is not `@Nullable`. But `<?>` actually means `<? extends B>`, where `B` is the
bound of the corresponding type variable. So if we have

```java
interface List<E extends @Nullable Object> {...}
```

then `List<?>` means the same as `List<? extends @Nullable Object>`. If we have

```java
class ImmutableList<E> implements List<E> {...}
```

then we saw that that means the same as

```java
class ImmutableList<E extends Object> implements List<E>
```

so `ImmutableList<?>` means the same as `ImmutableList<? extends Object>`. And
here, `@NullMarked` means that `Object` excludes null. The `get(int)` method of
`List<?>` can return null but the same method of `ImmutableList<?>` can't.
